Welcome back.
It's time to implement all that we've learned in the previous videos and make a functional programming
paradigm.
Amazon shopping cart so let's think about this.
We want to implement a cart feature that is we want to add items to cart at a 3 percent tax to the item
in the cart.
And while we want to buy an item which means moving whatever is in the cart to the purchases of the
user and then we finally want to empty that cart.
So it looks like all of these are functions that we're going to need to do.
What are these functions licious list them out so that we have a good plan in place.
We want to obviously purchase item which is going to do all of that for us.
So the first thing is I'm going to have a function purchase item.
What else will we want to add items to cart.
So I'm going to create another function items for item to cart let's keep it on a single line right
now because we don't have anything.
What else.
Well we want to add tax so I'm going to create another function call it apply tax to items we have function
by item which will physically move the cart to purchases and then finally will do the empty cart.
So function empty.
All right.
So we have our function that's going to affect the data that we have.
That is the user now based on what I learned about functional programming.
I want to keep these pure but it also looks like I'm applying a bunch of steps to the same data maybe
we can use something like compose to compose all these steps so that purchase item does well all these
things over here.
So the first thing I want to do is well just to test out that everything is working let's just create
the naive approach where we return from purchase item let's say we receive the user and the item from
here.
So we're gonna receive this user and the item and we're going to return the user with the new item.
So let's just say we want to return home.
Well we know that we want to keep things immutable.
We don't want to just modified the user so I'm going to return a new object.
I'm going to use object out sign here and object out assign and we can create a new object using an
empty object that we're creating as a first parameter.
Then the actual object that we're copying over and then we're going to add any updates to that object
as a third parameter.
So I'm going to say that the third parameter is going to be the fact that while I want the purchases
to be added to the item so I'm going to say Purchase says is going to include the item so nice and easy
naive approach so that if I call purchase items here or purchase item and I give it let's say the let's
say name is laptop and the price is three hundred forty four.
Nice and cheap laptop if I run this and I get object assign is not a function because not spelling correct
assign G.
That's better.
Let's run this.
Hey look at that I get something back but something's not working and that's because remember I have
two parameters here and I need to pass the user into purchase items.
So let's add the user in here and hit run.
And there you go.
Kim which is an active user now has purchased laptop that costs three hundred forty four.
And it's in their purchases history.
That's great but that's not why we needed to do right.
We have to do all these things because well people can just buy things they have to add things to their
cart.
We have to apply the taxes.
We need a record of what happened and we don't know what Kim did.
Maybe she wants to remove things from the cart.
This is too simplistic and looking at this I'm thinking we need compose we need to compose these functions
together I've changed my mind.
I don't want to do this anymore this is too simplistic.
What I want to do instead is something like this
I want to be able to compose purchase item I want to be able to add item to cart and you know let's
rename this to add item to cart because it makes more sense.
I want to add the item to cart initially and then because we're using compose we're gonna go from left
or right to left.
So we want to add the item to cart then we want to apply tax to the items in the cart and then we also
want to well buy the item and then finally once we've done all that then we can empty the cart All right
let's add commas here so that I don't get a syntax error and I want to be able to do this.
I have a factory called purchase item that takes data which will be the user and the item.
So that is the name that is laptop with a price of laptop just went up in price.
It's way more expensive actually.
You know what.
Let's keep it cheap.
Two hundred and I want to be able to do this.
I want to give this data to this function.
Then this function in this function then this function and I want all of this to happen for me.
All right so it looks like we need compose.
So let's compose these functions together.
The very first thing is well let's create a compose function.
I'm going to say const compose that's going to receive function and G so that's the first two parameters
but we have a problem here right.
Because we now have more than two functions that we want to go through.
What can we do here.
Now this is part of the reason that you'd use a library like RAM or load ash to use compose because
you don't need to implement it yourself.
I'm going to show you the way to do it but keep in mind that it does look a little confusing.
I prefer using the library version usually because well it hides away a lot of the complexity but in
this case we have way more arguments.
So I'm going to use the spread operator to get all the other arguments and then in here I'm going to
call f over G and inside just spread the arguments so I have composed now.
I also want to define purchase item and this purchase item.
Actually we have it over here so let's come down here.
This purchase item we're gonna change things up a bit here.
The purchase item is going to receive what Well it's going to receive a bunch of functions.
Right and we don't necessarily know how many.
So I'm going to just spread these functions and these spread functions are going to well return what
I want to use these functions and I want to be able to compose them.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to use reduce.
And if you're not sure why reduce is make sure you check out the video that I linked to with advanced
race and in reduce I'm going to pass a callback function that will take a previous value and the current
value or an accumulator.
And the next value.
So if I pass compose here the reduced function which is in itself a high order function is going to
run this for me which is going to take F N G but it's also going to iterate through empty card by item
of taxable items.
Add to Cart and actually return one by one and run these functions.
Like I said this can be a little overwhelming at first.
You might have to spend a few minutes figuring out what exactly you're doing but essentially we build
our own compose function that allows us to enter any number of parameters that we want into the purchase
item so that we can compose these functions and act over the data that we receive.
All right.
So let's go step by step now and see what we can do.
The first thing I want to do is add item to cart.
So with ADD item to cart it's going to receive a user and the item.
And in here we're going to just create a simple function we want to add a updated cart and this updated
cart.
Well we want to add to the user's cart but we don't know what the user had previously.
We want to make sure that we don't mutate any of the previous race.
We want to return what we currently have.
Let's do this instead.
We're going to say user dot cart dot com cat which will add a new array that is completely different
and copied from the previous array or the original array.
And in here I'm going to pass the item that we're buying so that we can finally return object dot assign
and in here we return a new object once again user with a new cart item.
All right.
In order to see that this works let's from all these other functions.
You see that I'm returning a new user state.
So in all these functions I'm going to have a user and it's going to.
Well let's just return user from each of these functions.
So as the data funnels through we can see the output.
So I'm not doing anything in these functions other than while passing the data through.
See if I've made any typos here if I run this purchase items oh and this is not an error function.
This is a function declaration.
So I have to make sure that I return in here
this properly if I run this.
Hey look at that can now has an item in her cart.
How cool is that.
I was able to purchase items while I was able to do the first thing add item to cart and I passed on
the data to the next functions that were composing but they just received the user and just passed it
all the way out like a factory.
How cool is that.
All right now that we've created this this is a pure function just takes in something and returns something
no matter how many times we call it.
It's always going to be the same.
Let's apply all the other functionality to these ones as well.
The first is to apply tax I'm going to say can't and let's use this structuring here so we don't have
to do user dot cart all the time.
So let's say user and in here.
Let's just say that the tax rate is one point three.
They say 3 or 30 percent 3 percent tax.
OK so let's create cost
tax rate and this tax rate will be one point zero three.
Let's do 30 percent for now.
Just because we can see the difference a lot better that way.
So 30 percent tax.
That's a big tax.
And we're going to say updated cart is going to equal cart dot map.
Remember cart is an array.
We're gonna map over this and we're gonna map over each item and we're going to return a new object
that contains well the name that is the item dot name so nothing's changed there.
But the price is going to be different.
It's going to be item dot price.
Multiply by the tax rate so that finally at the end of it all we can just return object dot assign.
Remember we want to return the user but a new copy of the user with the updated information that has
the cart updated cart so that if I run this Hey look at that the price of the laptop went up because
we applied the tax to it it went from two hundred to two hundred and sixty.
Oh boy.
This tax is really killing us.
All right let's keep going with bi item.
So in here we want to move the cart item to the purchases again using our functional approach.
This should be an easy one.
All we need to do is object dot assign.
And in here we have an empty object.
The user that we receive and all we do is while we have the purchases and we update that with the items
in the cart.
So it'll be user dot cart if I run this.
And once again I'm not spelling object design properly.
Let's try that again.
Hey look at that.
We have our purchases but we need to remove this from the actual cart because now Kim has purchased
her laptop.
So with our last function to finish things off let's do the last piece object dot assign hopefully I'm
spelling that right this time around we have an empty object that we attached a user to and then we
update the cart to be what just an empty array.
If I run this holy moly Kim has just purchased her first laptop.
It was 260 bucks because of the big tax.
But hey now she can do all the coding that she wants.
How nice was that.
I mean it was a little bit complicated at first because we had to create this compose function but now
that we have this compose in place this purchase items works really nicely.
Right.
Exactly like a factory where we add item to cart.
Apply tax two items by item empty cart.
If a new functionality such as upgrade to Kim's status to not active.
If we needed to add new functionality the rest of the code doesn't really care about that.
We can just create a new function and just add it in here.
That's the beauty of functional programming.
This idea that we're building these small composed of all functions that are each worried about their
own world so that whenever bugs happen.
Well as long as they're tested well it's most likely not then it's most likely in a place where we might
have state or we might be mutating state but we will know that hey these functions are OK because they're
pure.
Now here's the really really interesting part and why I think functional programming and the concepts
around it are so interesting because now if we want to say create another function like refund item
Well again that's easy to do.
We just have to remove things from purchases or even from the cart.
But the more interesting thing is the idea of now being able to play back history because let's be honest.
If you were Amazon you want to keep track of your data.
You want to know what users did.
Maybe Kim complains that hey I purchased my laptop but it's not in my purchases.
I can receive it and Amazon needs a way to go back in time and figure out what happened.
They need logs of what the user might have done that may have resulted in an error on their side inadvertently
using our functional programming paradigm.
We have an ability to travel back and forth through time.
Let me show you.
If for example we have a database there's just a cost database or you know what.
Let's do history.
Do Amazon history and this will be.
Well actually initially we'll just be an empty array and every time we do something we want to add to
this history.
For example in the IDE item to cart at the beginning I can just say Amazon thought Amazon history does
push the current user state and then maybe I want to make sure that I capture the state of the user
before we apply the taxes.
Maybe here when we buy the item and then empty cart I'm just pushing this user data to our Amazon history
so that when I run
Amazon history and I click Run check that out I have the entire history of Kim and what she did.
Now this doesn't look very pretty right now but I hope you can see that we have Kim initially with no
purchases nothing in the cart and all the way till the end where she has purchases and right now she
still has the things in the cart because we haven't captured the history after we empty the cart but
we can go back in time now as an Amazon employee I can go back in time and see where Kim made her purchases
when she added things to the cart when we added taxes to the items.
Now behind the scenes maybe Amazon can create new functions like get user state or function that is
go back in history or go forward.
How cool is that.
Another thing that you might be asking yourself as well were well how come we're doing push and Amazon
history isn't that state.
Are we modifying state.
And remember we can't just purely have pure functions in order for us to do anything with the program
at some point.
We do have to mutate data the idea of functional programming is to minimize those mutations all right.
This video's getting long so I want to finish off with the idea of pipe remember compose is we go from
right to left.
How would we fix this with pipe.
Well if you prefer reading left to right we just change this compose to pipe and just change g into
F and F into G.
We'll have to change the orders of these around into the opposite direction but that's it.
You can choose Piper compose based on what you like.
All right that's enough talking for me.
I hope that was exciting for you.
We're able to use all that we've learned in the previous videos to implement something quite clean.
Now this is obviously a simple example but I hope you now see the power of functional programming.
I'll see in the next one by.